== Building a Discord bot with Node.js and Repl.it

In this tutorial, we’ll use https://repl.it[repl.it] and Node.js to
build a Discord Chatbot. The bot will be able to join a Discord server
and respond to messages sent by people.

If you don’t like JavaScript, there’s also a
https://www.codementor.io/garethdwyer/building-a-discord-bot-with-python-and-repl-it-miblcwejz[Python
version of this tutorial].

You’ll find it easier to follow along if you have some JavaScript
knowledge and you should have used Discord or a similar app such as
Skype or Telegram before. We won’t be covering the very basics of
Node.js, but we will explain each line of code in detail, so if you have
any experience with programming, you should be able to follow along.

=== Setting up

We’ll be doing all of our coding through the Repl.it web IDE and hosting
our bot with Repl.it as well, so you won’t need to install any
additional software on your machine.

For set up, we’ll be walking through the following steps. Skip any that
don’t apply to you (e.g. if you already have a Discord account, you can
skip that section).

* Creating an account on https://repl.it[Repl.it].
* Creating an account on https://discordapp.com/[Discord].
* Creating an application and a bot user in your Discord account
* Creating a server on Discord
* Adding our bot to our Discord server

Let’s get through these admin steps first and then we can get to the fun
part of coding our bot.

==== Creating an account on Repl.it

Repl.it is an online IDE _and_ compute provider. Traditionally, you
would write code locally on your machine, and then have to "`deploy`"
the code to a server, so that other people on the internet could
interact with it. Repl.it removes one of these steps by combining the
two – you can write your code directly through the Repl.it interface and
it will automatically be deployed to the public internet.

Visit https://repl.it[Repl.it] in your web browser and hit the "`Sign
up`" button.

image:https://i.imgur.com/mc9Jzm7.png[Repl.it sign up button] *Image 1:
Signing up for Repl*

After signing up, press "`Start coding now`" and choose "`Node.js`" from
the list of available languages.

Play around with the interface a bit to see how easy it is to write and
run code. We’ll be coming back to this interface soon after we’ve done
some of the Discord set up.

==== Creating a bot in Discord and getting a token

If you’re reading this tutorial, you probably have at least heard of
Discord and likely have an existing account. If not, Discord is a VoIP
and Chat application that is designed to replace Skype for gamers. You
can sign up for a free account over at
https://discordapp.com/register[the Discord register page], and download
one of their desktop or mobile applications from
https://discordapp.com/[the Discord homepage].

Once you have an account, you’ll want to create a Discord application.
Visit https://discordapp.com/developers/applications/[the Discord
developer’s page] and press the "`Create new application`" button, as in
the image below. (I’ve already created two applications. If you haven’t,
you’ll only see the button that I’ve marked in red and not the two above
it.)

image:https://i.imgur.com/HHzbjJL.png[Discord create application page]
*Image 2: Creating a new Discord application*

The first thing to do on the next page is to note your Client ID, which
you’ll need to add the bot to the server. You can come back later and
get if from this page, or copy it somewhere where you can easily find it
later.

Fill out a name and description for your bot (feel free to be more
creative than me) and press "`save changes`".

image:https://i.imgur.com/yznoduG.png[Naming our Discord bot] *Image 3:
Naming our Discord Application*

Now you’ve created a Discord application. The next step is to add a bot
to this application, so head over to the "`Bot`" tab using the menu on
the left and press the "`Add Bot`" button, as indicated below. Click
"`yes, do it`" when Discord asks if you’re sure about bringing a new bot
to life.

image:https://i.imgur.com/aFN3Lr0.png[Adding a bot to our Discord
application] *Image 4: Adding a bot to our Discord Application*

The last thing we’ll need from our bot is a Token. Anyone who has the
bot’s Token can prove that they own the bot, so you’ll need to be
careful not to share this with anyone. You can get the token by pressing
"`Click to reveal token`", or copy it to your clipboard without seeing
it by pressing "`Copy`".

image:https://i.imgur.com/zZ1ctsg.png[Getting a Token for your bot]
*Image 5: Generating a token for our Discord bot*

Take note of your Token or copy it to your clipboard, as we’ll need to
add it to our code soon.

==== Creating a Discord server

If you don’t have a Discord server to add your bot to, you can create
one by opening the desktop Discord application that you downloaded
earlier. Press the "`+`" icon as shown below to create a server.
image:https://i.imgur.com/jf5yLjh.png[Creating a discord server] *Image
6: Creating a Discord server*

Press "`Create a server`" in the screen that follows, and then give your
server a name. Once the server is up and running, you can chat to
yourself, or invite some friends to chat with you. Soon we’ll invite our
bot to chat with us as well.

==== Adding your Discord bot to your Discord server

Our Discord bot is still just a shell at this stage as we haven’t
written any code to allow him to do anything, but let’s go ahead and add
him to our Discord server anyway. To add a bot to your server, you’ll
need the Client ID from the "`General Information`" page that we looked
at before (this is the one outlined in green in Image 3, *not* the Bot
Secret from Image 5).

Create a URL that looks as follows, but using your Client ID instead of
mine at the end:

https://discordapp.com/api/oauth2/authorize?scope=bot&client_id=477366174959665152.

Visit the URL that you created in your web browser and you’ll see a page
similar to the following where you can choose which server to add your
bot to.

image:https://i.imgur.com/t0nlSKC.png[Authorizing your bot to join your
server] *Image 7: Authorizing our bot to join our server*

After pressing "`authorize`", you should get an in-app Discord
notification telling you that your bot has joined your server.

Now we can get to the fun part of building a brain for our bot!

=== Creating a Repl and installing our Discord dependencies

The first thing we need to do is create a Node.js Repl to write the code
for our Discord bot. Over at https://repl.it[repl.it], create a new
Repl, as you did right at the start of this tutorial, choosing
"`Node.js`" as your language again.

We don’t need to reinvent the wheel as there is already a great Node
wrapper for the Discord bot API called
https://discord.js.org/[discord.js]. Normally we would install this
third-party library through https://www.npmjs.com/[npm], but because
we’re using Repl.it, we can skip the installation. Our Repl will
automatically pull in all dependencies.

In the default `+index.js+` file that is included with your new Repl,
add the following line of code.

[source,javascript]
----
const Discord = require('discord.js');
----

Press the "`Run`" button and you should see Repl installing the Discord
library in the output pane on the right, as in the image below.

image:https://i.imgur.com/7EexEVk.png[installing Discord.js] *Image 8:*
Installing Discord.js in our Repl.

Our bot is nearly ready to go – but we still need to plug in our secret
token. This will authorize our code to control our bot.

=== Setting up authorization for our bot

By default, Repl code is public. This is great as it encourages
collaboration and learning, but we need to be careful not to share our
secret bot token (which gives anyone who has access to it full control
of our bot).

To get around the problem of needing to give our _code_ access to the
token while allowing others to access our code but _not_ our token,
we’ll be using
https://www.digitalocean.com/community/tutorials/how-to-read-and-set-environmental-and-shell-variables-on-a-linux-vps[environment
variables]. On a normal machine, we’d set these directly on our
operating system, but using Repl we don’t have access to this. Repl
allows us to set secrets in environment variables through a special
`+.env+` file. Create a new file called exactly `+.env+` by using the
new file button in the left pane and add a variable to define your Bot’s
secret token (note that this is the second token that we got while
setting up the Bot – different from the Client ID that we used to add
our bot to our server). It should looks something like:

[source,bash]
----
DISCORD_BOT_SECRET=NDcUN5T32zcTjMYOM0Y1MTUy.Dk7JBw.ihrTSAO1GKHZSonqvuhtwta16WU
----

You’ll need to: * *Replace* the token below (after the `+=+` sign) with
the token that Discord gave you when creating your own bot. * Be careful
about *spacing*. Unlike in Python, if you put a space on either side of
the `+=+` in your `+.env+` file, these spaces will be part of the
variable name or the value, so make sure you don’t have any spaces
around the `+=+` or at the end of the line. * Run the code again.
Sometimes you’ll need to refresh the whole page to make sure that your
environment variables are successfully loaded.

[source,bash]
----
DISCORD_BOT_SECRET=NDcUN5T32zcTjMYOM0Y1MTUy.Dk7JBw.ihrTSAO1GKHZSonqvuhtwta16WU
----

In the image below you we’ve highlighted the "`Add file`" button, the
new file (`+.env+`) and how to deine the secret token for our bot’s use.

image:https://i.imgur.com/Io372eV.png[Creating our .env file] *Image 9:
Creating our .env file*

Let’s make a slightly Discord bot that repeats everything we say but in
reverse. We can do this in only a few lines of code. In your
`+index.js+` file, add the following:

[source,javascript]
----
const Discord = require('discord.js');
const client = new Discord.Client();
const token = process.env.DISCORD_BOT_SECRET;

client.on('ready', () => {
  console.log("I'm in");
  console.log(client.user.username);
});

client.on('message', msg => {
    if (msg.author.id != client.user.id) {
        msg.channel.send(msg.content.split('').reverse().join(''));
    }
});

client.login(token);
----

Let’s tear this apart line by line to see what it does.

* *Line 1* is what we had earlier. This line both tells Repl to install
the third party library and brings it into this file so that we can use
it.
* In *line 2*, we create a Discord `+Client+`. We’ll use this client to
send commands to the Discord _server_ to control our bot and send it
commands.
* In *line 3* we retrieve our secret token from the environment
variables (which Repl set from our `+.env+` file).
* In *line 5*, we define an `+event+` for our client, which defines how
our bot should react to the "`ready`" event. The Discord bot is going to
run _asynchronously_, which might be a bit confusing if you’re used to
running standard synchronous code. We won’t go into asynchronous coding
in depth here, but if you’re interested in what this is and why it’s
used, there’s a good guide over at
https://blog.risingstack.com/node-hero-async-programming-in-node-js/[RisingStack].
In short, instead of running the code in our file from top to bottom,
we’ll be running pieces of code in response to specific events.
* In *lines 6-8* we define how our bot should respond to the "`ready`"
event, which is fired when our bot successfully joins a server. We
instruct our bot to output some information server side (i.e. this will
be displayed in our Repl’s output, but not sent as a message through to
Discord). We’ll print a simple `+I'm in+` message to see that the bot is
there and print our bot’s username (if you’re running multiple bots,
this will make it easier to work out who’s doing what).
* *Lines 10-14* are similar, but instead of responding to an "`ready`"
event, we tell our bot how to handle new messages. *Line 11* says we
only want to respond to messages that aren’t from us (otherwise our bot
will keep responding to himself – you can remove this line to see why
that’s a problem), and *line 12* says we’ll send a new message to the
same channel where we received a message (`+msg.channel+`) and the
content we’ll send will be the same message that we received, but
backwards. To reverse a string, we split it into its individual
characters, reverse the resulting array, and then join it all back into
a string again.

The last line fires up our bot and uses the token we loaded earlier to
log into Discord.

Press the big green "`Run`" button again and you should see your bot
reporting a successful channel join in the Repl output.

image:https://i.imgur.com/DnSvWvY.png[Repl output showing channel join]
*Image 10: Seeing our bot join our server*

Over in your Discord app, send a message and see your Bot respond!

image:https://i.imgur.com/Wu1ZU6F.png[Messages from our bot] *Image 11:
Our bot can talk!*

=== Keeping our bot alive

Your bot can now respond to messages, but only for as long as your Repl
is running. If you close your browser tab or shut down your computer,
your bot will stop and no longer respond to messages on Discord.

Repl will keep your code running after you close the browser tab only if
you are running a web server. Our bot doesn’t require an explicit web
server to run, but we can create a server and run it in the background
just to keep our Repl alive.

Create a new file in your project called `+keep_alive.js+` and add the
following code:

[source,javascript]
----
var http = require('http');

http.createServer(function (req, res) {
  res.write("I'm alive");
  res.end();
}).listen(8080);
----

We won’t go over this in detail as it’s not central to our bot, but here
we start a web server that will return "`I’m alive`" if anyone visits
it.

In our `+index.js+` file, we need to add a require statement for this
server at the top. Add the following line near the top of `+index.js+`.

[source,javascript]
----
const keep_alive = require('./keep_alive.js')
----

After doing this and hitting the green "`Run`" button again, you should
see some changes to your Repl. For one, you’ll see a new pane in the top
right which shows the web output from your server. We can see that
visiting our Repl now returns a basic web page showing the "`I’m alive`"
string that we told our web server to return by default.

image:https://i.imgur.com/zTHpTbK.png[Running a Node server in the
background] *Image 12* Output from our Node server

Now your bot will stay alive even after closing your browser or shutting
down your development machine. Repl will still clean up your server and
kill your bot after about one hour of inactivity, so if you don’t use
your bot for a while, you’ll have to log into Repl and start the bot up
again. Alternatively, you can set up a third-party (free!) service like
https://uptimerobot.com/[Uptime Robot]. Uptime Robot pings your site
every 5 minutes to make sure it’s still working – usually to notify you
of unexpected downtime, but in this case the constant pings have the
side effect of keeping our Repl alive as it will never go more than an
hour without receiving any activity. Note that you need to select the
HTTP option instead of the Ping option when setting up Uptime Robot as
repl.it requires regular HTTP requests to keep your chatbot alive.

=== Forking and extending our basic bot

This is not a very useful bot as is, but the possibilities are only
limited by your creativity now! You can have your bot receive input from
a user, process the input, and respond in any way you choose. In fact,
with the basic input and output that we’ve demonstrated, we have most of
the components of any modern computer, all of which are based on the
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Von_Neumann_architecture[Von Neumann
architecture] (we could easily add the missing memory by having our bot
write to a file, or with a bit more effort link in a
https://www.sqlite.org/index.html[SQLite database] for persistent
storage).

If you followed along this tutorial, you’ll have your own basic Repl bot
to play around with and extend. If you were simply reading, you can
easily fork my bot at
[https://repl.it/@GarethDwyer1/discord-bot-node](https://repl.it/@GarethDwyer1/discord-bot-node)
and extend it how you want (you’ll need to add your own token and
recreate the `+.env+` file still). Happy hacking!

If you’re stuck for ideas, why not link up your Discord bot to the
https://dev.twitch.tv/[Twitch API] to get notified when your favourite
streamers are online, or build a
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Interactive_fiction[text adventure]. Also
join Repl’s Discord server by using this invite link
https://discord.gg/QWFfGhy - you can test your bot, share it with other
bot builders to get feedback, and see what Discord bots people are
building on Repl.

If you enjoyed this tutorial, you might also enjoy my tutorial on
https://www.codementor.io/garethdwyer/building-a-telegram-bot-using-python-part-1-goi5fncay[building
a chatbot for Telegram] or my book
https://www.packtpub.com/web-development/flask-example[Flask by Example]
where I show how to build Python applications using the Flask framework.
If you have any questions or comments about this tutorial, feel free to
https://twitter.com/sixhobbits[reach out on Twitter].
