<!DOCTYPE html>

Ritza

[[header]]
[[content]]
Ritza

Marketing as Education

We produce articles for your company’s technical blog or community.

Ritza produces the internet’s best articles that teach developers how to
build technical solutions. See https://repl.co/showcase/repl.it for
examples.

Companies use these articles to reach potential customers, either
directly (by commissioning articles that teach people how to use their
product) or indirectly (by hosting great technical content on their
domain and ranking well on Google as a result).

Ritza offers not only the highest quality articles, but also the
simplest possible process for creating these. You purchase a
subscription to Ritza and get articles published or delivered to you
every month.

How much does it cost?

Ritza’s standard package is 4000 words/month split into 1-4 articles
over the month and costs $3000/month on a quarterly contract.

How do I purchase a subscription?

We’re still in closed beta. Email garethdwyer@gmail.com.

What makes Ritza’s content different

Instead of using our services, you might choose to find a freelancer,
employ a full time content writer, create an in-house content team, or
contract an agency. All of these are valid options and we’ll gladly
refer you if they seem a better fit for your needs.

However, we distinguish ourselves from all of these options in several
ways

Our content is created by a team of professionals

Ritza’s content is created by a team of people who all have expertise in
technology and writing. By contrast, most other content on the web is
produced either by

An individual writer, often "`unpolished`" in terms of editing, design,
and readibility

A '`content team`', usually heavy on '`content strategists`', '`growth
hackers`', '`SEO experts`', and marketing managers. Ritza takes a strong
stance that most of these people do not add value to the content. Often
the writer is required to work closely under the direction of these
people, resulting in generic content and "`fluff`" pieces.

Ritza’s team consists solely of craftspeople: doers, not overseers.
These are people who understand the audience very well, as they are part
of it. They are creating the content that they wish existed. The writer
is always the main contributor to any piece of content, and is supported
by editors and designers as necessary.

While many content agencies claim that their writing is produced by
"`experts`", they often pay 1c-10c/word for this "`expert created`"
content, with the rest of the fee being absorbed by account managers and
other business focussed people. The "`expert`" is often someone without
much expertise on the topic.

Our content is beautiful and distraction free

[.image]## Medium.com is well-known for being extremely user hostile,
but even other sites which claim to have their readers’ best interests
at heart are not shy of ruining their content. Hackernoon has rows up
rows of menus, reminiscent of browser toolbars from the 90s. Dev.to has
many calls to action, trying to trick the reader into failing at their
goal – to read an article.

Compare this to the beautiful site by Adrian Zumbrunnen. All you can see
is text, because that is why you, as a reader, are there in the first
place.

Our content focuses solely on educating your readers

However, people are easy-going, and they have formed the habit of
reading page upon page of all sorts of such verbiage, without having any
particular idea of what the author really means. They fancy it is all as
it should be, and fail to discover that he is writing simply for
writing’s sake. (Schopenhauer, On Style)

Ritza’s articles never have keyword stuffing, boring reflections, or
catchy slogans. All of our content has a single purpose: to teach. And
each article teaches a single concept.


