== What is value?

____
Undoubtedly, it’s a buzzword. But the concept of "`value`" still has
value.
____

If you’ve ever worked in a company, you’ve no doubt heard phrases like
"`create value`", "`unlock value`", "`extract value`", "`customer
value`", "`shareholder value`", and "`value-add`" thrown around. You’ve
probably rolled your eyes at someone using the phrase to bullshit their
way through a conversation.

If you’re a software engineer, you might have figured out that changing
your Resume from using phrases like "`I worked on a Java codebase of
around 100k LoC, using Spring and React`" to ones more like "`I built a
widget-shipping feature that shipped 300k widgets and ultimately created
$1 million in business value`" is a good way of '`creating value`' in
concrete sense of a higher paying job.

But while we all probably have this vague idea that we are "`adding
value`" to something some of the time, it’s an imprecise term and we can
all benefit from understanding it better. I’ll define a lose framework
below for talking about some valuable aspects of value, but mainly with
the aim of making the following point:

____
It’s common for people to create short term measurable value while
destroying long term immeasurable value
____

So if that already seems fundamentally obvious to you, feel free to skip
the rest and use this article as a reference.

== Manager versus Developer

One of the clearest ways we can see that "`value`" doesn’t have a clear
meaning is to look at the classic divide between managers and software
developers. I use this example because of personal experience, but I
assume it works just as well in any industry between the "`doers`" and
the "`overseers`".

Software engineers are craftsman. They build things, solve problems, and
ultimately create. In many companies, they might see "`management`" as a
necessary evil. They might believe that they add value to the company by
shipping code _in spite_ of management rather than with the support of
management.

Managers oversee and delegate. In software engineering teams, they may
or may not be technical. Either way, they may see engineers as fungible:
simply doing the ground work which can be done by any of millions of
replaceable drones, and believe that it is the direction of these
workers that ultimately creates value.

It might be tempting to believe that one of them is correct, but given
there are pretty smart people in both camps, it would make more sense
that they’re _both_ correct, by different definitions or configurations
of "`value`".

So what is value?

== Something that can be created and destroyed

If we all talk about creating value, it’s intuitive that value can be
destroyed as well. If I delete all the code in a project and wipe the
backups, or burn down my office, or spill water over my laptop, I have
destroyed some amount of value.

Sometimes I can create value in one area while destroying it in another:
for example, a business can cancel a specific product line, destroying
any value it created, but move people and resources who were supporting
it to a different produce line, creating value there.

== Something that can be long term or short term

Getting on the phone and making one sale creates some value, but this is
_short term_. I have value for today, but I need to make more calls
tomorrow if I want more value then. By contrast, writing an article that
solves a problem many potential customers have and putting it on the
company blog creates long term value: a customer might still find it in
several years time, discover the company, and buy a product. This is
_long term_ value.

From this, we also see how trade-offs happen. Often it’s possible to
_destroy short term_ value and _create long term_ value. For example, by
hiring a new employee I give up some short term value (cash on hand,
training resources) and create long term value (whatever the employee
brings to the company).

And here we see the first potential danger already. While it’s
reasonable to sacrifice short term value for long term results, it’s
often very tempting to do the opposite, especially if we are judged on
weekly, monthly, or quarterly metrics. If I lie to a customer about how
good my product is, I’m more likely to make a sale (short term value),
but the reputation of the company and product will decrease (long term
value).

== Something that can be measurable or immeasurable

Reputation is hard to measure, though many people try. Cash in the bank
is easy to measure. This makes trade-offs tricky: how do I choose how
much measurable value to sacrifice in return for value that is
impossible to measure? What about the other way around? Employee
happiness is another example of something that is hard to really measure
(though many companies try through engagement surveys). If I ask
everyone to work a slightly longer work day, or for a slightly less
money, I have created measurable value while destroying immeasurable
value.

As another example, imagine a chef at a restaurant that is also
concerned with the overall profitability of the restaurant. Serving out
20 plates of stew, it might be tempting to "`cheat`" and make up the
20th one by slightly reducing the portions of the other 19. Every day, I
could slightly cut portion sizes, creating measurable short term value.
The small hit to the restaurants reputation would probably be
unnoticeable until I reduce the sizes so much that customers start
leaving bad reviews about still being hungry after their visit.

== Combinations of value trade-offs

There are many other attributes of value that we could talk about, but
even with only these three, there are enough combinations to cause
confusion. If we look at a specific situation and talk about "`value`"
being created or destroyed, we often actually mean that some combination
of measurable, immeasurable, long-term, and short-term value is being
created or destroyed. If we abbreviate these to "`MS`" (measurable
short-term), "`ML`" (measurable long-term), "`IS`" (immeasurable
short-term) and "`IL`" (immeasurable long-term) and use Green for
"`create`" and Red for "`destroy`", we have 16 different kinds of value
at play, as shown in the following image.

image:images/value.jpg[value combinations]

For example, you could describe an action or strategy as fitting the
second block of the first row (red: LI, LM, SI, green: SM) if it was
expected to create short term measurable value (such as a fixed number
of sales) while destroying all of

* long term immeasurable value (e.g. tarnishing the company reputation)
* long term measurable value (e.g. reducing recurring revenue)
* short term immeasurable value (e.g. distracting key employees from
their main goals for a fixed period)

In many situations, you’ll probably find that smart people argue about
whether one option will create more value than another. Sometimes the
disagreement will in fact be directly about the value of something
(especially if it is immeasurable), but more often, they’ll be using
imprecise terms to describe what value is being created and what value
is being destroyed.

== The most dangerous combinations and those with the most potential

We started out with:

____
It’s common for people to create small amounts of short term measurable
value while destroying large amounts of long term immeasurable value
____

and this is no doubt the most dangerous combination to find yourself in.
It’s pretty easy to justify your choice, especially within a company
that prides itself on "`data driven decisions`" with "`this will create
_x_ dollars of value within _y_ months`", while ignoring the other
configurations of value that are being harmed.

Conversely, aiming to create long term immeasurable value while
sacrificing short term measurable value has the most potential. For one,
you’ll have less competition as others focus on that what is measurable.
And more importantly, you’ll still be around in 10 or 50 years while
your competitors will have killed the proverbial goose that lays golden
eggs.
